What would happen if you tried to hit a baseball pitched at 90% the speed of
light?
- Ellen McManis
Let's set aside the question of how we got the baseball moving that fast.
We'll suppose it's a normal pitch, except in the instant the pitcher releases
the ball, it magically accelerates to 0.9c. From that point onward, everything
proceeds according to normal physics.:
[/imgs/a/1/01.png]
The answer turns out to be "a lot of things", and they all happen very
quickly, and it doesn't end well for the batter (or the pitcher). I sat down
with some physics books, a Nolan Ryan action figure, and a bunch of videotapes
of nuclear tests and tried to sort it all out. What follows is my best guess at
a nanosecond-by-nanosecond portrait:
The ball is going so fast that everything else is practically stationary. Even
the molecules in the air are stationary. Air molecules vibrate back and forth
at a few hundred miles per hour, but the ball is moving through them at 600
million miles per hour. This means that as far as the ball is concerned,
they're just hanging there, frozen.
The ideas of aerodynamics don't apply here. Normally, air would flow around
anything moving through it. But the air molecules in front of this ball don't
have time to be jostled out of the way. The ball smacks into them so hard that
the atoms in the air molecules actually fuse with the atoms in the ball's
surface. Each collision releases a burst of gamma rays and scattered particles.
[/imgs/a/1/02.png] [/imgs/a/1/03.png]
These gamma rays and debris expand outward in a bubble centered on the
pitcher's mound. They start to tear apart the molecules in the air, ripping
the electrons from the nuclei and turning the air in the stadium into an
expanding bubble of incandescent plasma. The wall of this bubble approaches the
batter at about the speed of light---only slightly ahead of the ball itself.
[/imgs/a/1/04.png]
The constant fusion at the front of the ball pushes back on it, slowing it
down, as if the ball were a rocket flying tail-first while firing its engines.
Unfortunately, the ball is going so fast that even the tremendous force from
this ongoing thermonuclear explosion barely slows it down at all. It does,
however, start to eat away at the surface, blasting tiny particulate fragments
of the ball in all directions. These fragments are going so fast that when they
hit air molecules, they trigger two or three more rounds of fusion.
After about 70 nanoseconds the ball arrives at home plate. The batter hasn't
even seen the pitcher let go of the ball, since the light carrying that
information arrives at about the same time the ball does. Collisions with the
air have eaten the ball away almost completely, and it is now a bullet-shaped
cloud of expanding plasma (mainly carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen)
ramming into the air and triggering more fusion as it goes. The shell of x-rays
hits the batter first, and a handful of nanoseconds later the debris cloud
hits.
When it reaches the batter, the center of the cloud is still moving at an
appreciable fraction of the speed of light. It hits the bat first, but then the
batter, plate, and catcher are all scooped up and carried backward through the
backstop as they disintegrate. The shell of x-rays and superheated plasma
expands outward and upward, swallowing the backstop, both teams, the stands,
and the surrounding neighborhood---all in the first microsecond.
Suppose you're watching from a hilltop outside the city. The first thing you
see is a blinding light, far outshining the sun. This gradually fades over the
course of a few seconds, and a growing fireball rises into a mushroom cloud.
Then, with a great roar, the blast wave arrives, tearing up trees and shredding
houses.
Everything within roughly a mile of the park is leveled, and a firestorm
engulfs the surrounding city. The baseball diamond is now a sizable crater,
centered a few hundred feet behind the former location of the backstop.
[/imgs/a/1/05.png]
A careful reading of official Major League Baseball Rule 6.08(b) suggests that
in this situation, the batter would be considered &quot;hit by pitch&quot;, and
would be eligible to advance to first base.
