******_Diamond_******
&quot;If a meteor made out of diamond and 100 feet in diameter was traveling at
the speed of light and hit the earth, what would happen to it?"
---Aidan Smith, Age 8, via his father Jeff
Nothing made of matter can go at the speed of light. But that's ok---we can
get close enough!
No matter how fast you push something, it will never quite get up to light
speed. This seems like it can't be right, but it is. Our universe has some
weird rules. But the closer something gets to the speed of light, the more
energy and momentum it has---and this energy and momentum go up without limit.
We'll start slow and work our way up.
1 kilometer per second:
If we drop the meteor from the edge of space, 100 kilometers up, it'll punch
through the atmosphere without slowing down too much and hit the ground moving
about Mach 3---over a kilometer a second.
As it falls, it compresses the air in front of it. When the air is compressed,
it heats it up. (This is the same thing that heats up spacecraft and
meteors---actual air friction has little to do with that.) By the time it
reaches the ground, the lower surface will have heated to over 500℃, which is
enough to glow visibly.
When it hits the ground, two minutes after it was released, it makes a crater
300 meters across---the size of a school, shattering into fragments in the
process.
[/imgs/a/20/diamond_1.png]
11 kilometers per second:
If we set the diamond in space a little ways away from the Earth, and let it
fall toward us, it will hit at about 11 kilometers per second. This is
Earth's escape velocity, and anything that hits the Earth from space
will---thanks to gravity---be going at least that fast.
At 11 kilometers per second, the brief descent would be visible as a fireball.
The energy of the impact would be comparable to a small atomic bomb, and the
crater it would create would be a kilometer across---a little smaller than
Meteor Crater in Arizona.
[/imgs/a/20/diamond_11.png]
72 kilometers per second:
This is just about the fastest that anything can hit the Earth if it's
orbiting the Sun. The Leonid meteor shower hits at this speed.
Oddly, the speed that something is going doesn't really affect how deeply it
digs into the ground. Isaac Newton came up with a_very_clever_idea for
estimating how deeply projectiles will go in their targets before stopping. It
turns out that no matter how fast a projectile is going, if it hits something
that's about the same density, it will only go about one body-length in.
[/imgs/a/20/diamond_momentum.png]
However, it will make quite a splash. The 72-kilometer-per-second diamond
sphere blasts out a crater over two kilometers across, with an energy release
comparable to that of the biggest fusion bombs.
Here's where things get weird.
3,000 kilometers per second = 0.01c:
This would be pretty bad. The thing that makes this a little unpredictable is
the fact that at speeds in the range of hundreds of kilometers per second, the
air begins_to_undergo_nuclear_fusion (Google that paper title to find the full
text). This, combined with plain old plasma heating, may manage to eat apart
the diamond sphere completely before it reaches the ground.
But it doesn't do the ground much good. The sphere doesn't spread out
enough to make a difference, and it still hits the ground in roughly one spot.
The blast releases a thousand times more energy than the largest nuclear
weapon, devastating whatever region it came down over. It gouges out a massive
crater---though not the biggest one Earth has ever seen.
[/imgs/a/20/diamond_3000.png]
0.99c:
This is where relativity kicks in.
At these speeds, the bonds holding the sphere together are completely
irrelevant. It's just a collection of carbon atoms moving so fast that
Lorentz contraction flattens the whole thing into a pancake (although we
wouldn't_be_able_to_see_that_visually). The SRIM particle physics simulation
tool can help answer some questions about what happens when it hits.
The carbon atoms in the ball carry about 70 GeV of energy each. They're
actually moving too fast to fuse directly with the air---they just pass through
it completely. The air molecules punch three meters into the face of the ball
before coming to a rest inside it, and it arrives at the ground with a bunch
more matter in it than it started with. It's also expanding rapidly.
When it hits the surface, it disintegrates completely, digging downward and
outward, carving a cone-shaped path down through the bedrock. The impact depth
equation no longer applies, since the atoms are literally passing through each
other.
The energy cracks a hole in the crust and blows open a crater so big you can
see the molten mantle. This delivers the energy of 50 dinosaur-killing
Chicxulub impacts---enough to cause a mass extinction, if not end life
completely.
[/imgs/a/20/diamond_99.png]
I've always thought that one of the the great things about physics is that
you can add more digits to any number and see what happens and nobody can stop
you.
0.9999999c:
At this speed, every carbon molecule carries 25 TeV of energy, comparable to
particles in the beam of the Large Hadron Collider. A little faster, and we
might spot Higgs bosons in the impact debris.
As it stands, the whole thing hits the planet with about the kinetic energy of
the orbiting Moon. It's enough to punch a gaping hole in the mantle and shake
up the surface across the whole planet, turning it molten. This probably ends
all life on and around Earth.
Oops, cat stepped on my keyboard again and I added a bunch more 9s.
0.9999999999999999999999951c
The fastest object (with mass) in recorded history might be the Oh-My-God
particle (no relation to the God particle), a proton from space that plowed
into the atmosphere over Utah in 1991. It was moving at
99.99999999999999999999951% of the speed of light, which meant it packed the
kinetic energy of a baseball---in a single proton. The cascade of particles it
blasted apart dwarfed anything the LHC could produce.
Nobody knows how it got to be moving so fast. Particles moving that fast hit
the Earth a handful of times a year. They seem to come from the general
direction of exploding galaxies, but what happened to to make them leave in
such a hurry---and why they haven't slowed down more before they got
here---is something of a mystery.
Let's give Aidan's diamond meteor the speed of the Oh My God particle.
These speeds are so high that my copy of SRIM flatly refuses to simulate them.
However, we can get some idea from looking at how cosmic rays cascade through
rock.
The diamond sweeps out a column of atmosphere without seeming to notice and
disappears into the crust. A cloud of expanding plasma and radiation grows
around the entry point as the energy ripples outward through the body of the
planet. Forty milliseconds later the entire far side expands outward in an
incandescent cloud.
The diamond meteor, and the cascade of particles it created as it collided with
the crust, is spread out throughout the body of our planet. The superheated
planet glows brighter than the sun.
The momentum would be enough to knock the Earth into a different orbit---but
the Earth is no more. The energy deposited is ten thousand times greater than
the planet's gravitational binding energy, and the planet is blown into an
expanding cloud of plasma, with a particularly energetic streamer extending
away from the far side of the impact site, out into space.
The Sun hiccups and flares as it absorbs waves of dust. The surfaces of Mars
and Venus are scoured clean by the waves of incredibly high-energy plasma.
[/imgs/a/20/diamond_alien.png]
And in the distant future, an alien astronomer on a world hundreds of light-
years from Earth frowns at a beeping detector, and wonders what violent event
would make a particle move so fast.

